By Mikayla Bouchard
Dec. 22, 2018

For President Trump, 2018 has been a year of perpetual motion. He has presided over near constant turmoil as he has increasingly relied on his own instincts. In just the last week, the flurry of activity has rocked the government, the military and the markets.

Two of our White House correspondents write:

“At the midpoint of his term, Mr. Trump has grown more sure of his own judgment and more cut off from anyone else’s than at any point since taking office.”

[Read their story: For Trump, ‘a War Every Day,’ Waged Increasingly Alone]

Here’s a look at the major events — some high, some low — that have undoubtedly shaped Mr. Trump’s thinking heading into 2019.

January
The government shut down for three days starting at 12:01 a.m. on Jan. 20.

Days later, Mr. Trump delivered his first State of the Union address.

Balking at an immigration deal, Mr. Trump asked lawmakers in the Oval Office why there were so many people from “shithole countries” coming to the United States, rather than from places like Norway.

Video

1:46
Racist or Not? How TV News Reacted to Trump’s Comment
After President Trump used vulgar language about immigrants, TV news grappled with a question: Were his comments racist?
February
Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s longtime personal lawyer, said that he had paid $130,000 out of his own pocket to Stormy Daniels, a pornographic-film actress who had claimed to have had an affair with Mr. Trump.

Video

2:01
Stormy Daniels: Timeline of a Trump Scandal
Here’s a guide to understanding the White House scandal after Michael Cohen’s admission that President Trump directed him to give the porn star Stormy Daniels hush money.
A gunman opened fired at Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., killing 17 people.

A vigil honoring victims of the shooting in Parkland, Fla.
Credit
Saul Martinez for The New York Times


Image
A vigil honoring victims of the shooting in Parkland, Fla.CreditSaul Martinez for The New York Times
House Republicans released a secret memo accusing the Russia investigators of bias.

The government shut down again, this time for only a few hours.

Hope Hicks, the White House communications director, told House investigators that her work for Mr. Trump had occasionally required her to tell white lies. A day later, she announced her resignation.

Hope Hicks, the former communications director.
Credit
Leah Millis/Reuters


Image

Hope Hicks, the former communications director.CreditLeah Millis/Reuters
March
Mr. Trump, defying opposition from his own party and protests from overseas, signed orders imposing stiff and sweeping new tariffs on imported steel and aluminum.

Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson was fired, to be replaced by Mike Pompeo, and H.R. McMaster, the president’s national security adviser, was forced out and replaced by John R. Bolton.

Video

1:19
Rex Tillerson Is Out as Secretary of State
President Trump announced that the C.I.A. director, Mike Pompeo, will replace Rex Tillerson as secretary of state.
The March for Our Lives rally, one of hundreds of protests held across the world, took place in Washington to call for action on gun violence.

The special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, subpoenaed the Trump Organization to turn over documents, including some related to Russia.

John Dowd resigned as Mr. Trump’s lead lawyer for the special counsel investigation.

April
Mr. Trump denied knowledge of hush payments to Stormy Daniels.

Video

0:21
Trump’s Initial Denial About Stormy Daniels Payment
In April, President Trump denied knowledge of a $130,000 payment to Stephanie Clifford, a pornographic film actress known as Stormy Daniels. It was the first time he commented publicly on the scandal.CreditCreditDoug Mills/The New York Times
The F.B.I. raided Mr. Cohen’s office and hotel room. Mr. Trump called it “disgraceful.”

Video

1:56
Trump and Cohen’s Hush-Money Scandal: Why It Matters
President Trump’s former lawyer Michael Cohen has been sentenced to prison for offenses, including paying women for their silence during the 2016 election. Here’s a look at how this could affect the president.CreditCreditChang W. Lee/The New York Times
The United States, Britain and France launched airstrikes against Syria over a suspected chemical weapons attack.

Video

1:35
U.S. Strikes Chemical Weapons Sites in Syria
The airstrikes on three sites in Syria, launched early Saturday local time, were part of what officials said was an effort to deter future chemical attacks. Credit Credit Hassan Ammar/Associated Press
Mark Zuckerberg, the Facebook chief, testified on data privacy and other issues before Congress.

May
Mr. Trump pulled out of the Iran nuclear deal.

Video

0:50
Trump Pulls Out of Iran Deal
President Trump said pulling out of the Iran nuclear deal sends a message that “the United States no longer makes empty threats.”CreditCreditDoug Mills/The New York Times
Mr. Trump revamped his legal team for the Russia investigation.

The American Embassy in Israel was moved to Jerusalem. The same day, mass protests along the Gaza border raged anew.

Video

1:52
Speeches in Jerusalem, Gunfire in Gaza: 2 Scenes, 40 Miles Apart
While a ceremony to mark the relocation of the United States Embassy took place in Jerusalem, thousands of Palestinians protested. In Gaza, at least 50 people were killed by Israeli forces as demonstrators tried to cross the border fence.CreditCreditAssociated Press
The Department of Homeland Security enacted a “zero tolerance” immigration policy, causing the forced separation of migrant families at the border.

June
Outrage over the separation policy swept the country, prompting the administration to launch an aggressive defense.

Video

1:36
How Trump’s Team Defends ‘Zero Tolerance’
The White House is responding to criticism of its policy against illegal border crossings in four very distinct ways.CreditCreditTom Brenner/The New York Times
Under enormous political pressure, Mr. Trump signed an executive order meant to end family separation.

Mr. Trump met with Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s leader, in Singapore and discussed eliminating the North’s nuclear arsenal.

Video

2:24
Trump on Kim Meeting: ‘I’m Very Proud’
President Trump spoke about his agreement with Kim Jong-un for the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, and his plans to invite the North Korean leader to the White House.CreditCreditDoug Mills/The New York Times

The special counsel issued an indictment of 12 Russian intelligence officers in the hacking of the Democratic National Committee and the Clinton presidential campaign.

During a news conference in Helsinki, Finland, Mr. Trump stood next to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and publicly challenged the conclusion of his own intelligence agencies that Moscow interfered in the 2016 presidential election.

Video

2:42
How Trump Dodged Questions About Russian Election Meddling
During a news conference with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, President Trump would not say whether he believed Russia meddled with the 2016 presidential election.CreditCreditDoug Mills/The New York Times
Many Republicans were not pleased with the performance.

Video

1:14
Republican Reaction to Trump: ‘It’s Just Unacceptable’
Several members of President Trump’s party criticized the remarks he made suggesting that Russia did not interfere with the 2016 presidential election.CreditCreditAl Drago for The New York Times
Scott Pruitt, the E.P.A. chief, resigned under a cloud of ethics scandals.

Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh was nominated by Mr. Trump to fill a vacancy on the Supreme Court left by the retirement of Justice Anthony M. Kennedy.

August
Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s former campaign chairman, was convicted of five counts of tax fraud, two counts of bank fraud and one count of failure to disclose a foreign bank account.

John McCain of Arizona died at 81. Mr. Trump was not invited to the funeral. While the president was absent from Washington National Cathedral, he was a clear point of contrast to the former senator.

Video

0:57
Meghan McCain: ‘America Was Always Great’
John McCain’s daughter Meghan McCain delivered an emotional tribute to her father that included a steely rebuke to President Trump.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York Times
Mr. Cohen, pleading guilty to a litany of crimes, said in court that Mr. Trump had directed him to arrange payments to two women — including Stormy Daniels — during the 2016 campaign to keep them from speaking publicly about affairs they said they had with Mr. Trump. Federal prosectors affirmed this months later.

September
After an initial round of confirmation hearings, Judge Kavanaugh reappeared on Capitol Hill to testify about allegations of sexual misconduct. One accuser, Christine Blasey Ford, also delivered emotional testimony.

Video

2:21
The Sexual Assault Allegations Against Kavanaugh
There are multiple women who have accused Judge Brett Kavanaugh of sexual misconduct. Here are their allegations and his responses.CreditCreditT.J. Kirkpatrick for The New York Times,
Judge Kavanaugh was confirmed by the Senate to the Supreme Court.

The Trump administration, Mexico and Canada negotiated a new trade deal to replace Nafta, called the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, or U.S.M.C.A.

A member of the Trump administration, identifying himself or herself as a senior official, wrote an opinion article for The New York Times, claiming to be a “member of the resistance” in the administration.

Hurricane Florence thrashed the East Coast, particularly the Carolinas.

October
Jamal Khashoggi, a columnist for The Washington Post who was critical of Saudi Arabia’s rulers, was killed at the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul.

Video

8:33
Killing Khashoggi: How a Brutal Saudi Hit Job Unfolded
An autopsy expert. A lookalike. A black van. Our video investigation follows the movements of the 15-man Saudi hit team that killed and dismembered the journalist Jamal Khashoggi.
The United States unemployment rate dropped to 3.7 percent.

Hurricane Michael slammed into the Florida Panhandle.

11 people were killed when a gunman, shouting anti-Semitic slurs, opened fire at a synagogue in Pittsburgh.

A man in Florida was arrested in connection with a wave of mail bombs that targeted people critical of Mr. Trump, including former President Barack Obama, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., the actor Robert De Niro and CNN.

November
A wildfire in Northern California became the deadliest in the state’s history.

Mr. Trump viewed a neighborhood destroyed by the wildfires in California.
Credit
Tom Brenner for The New York Times


Image

Mr. Trump viewed a neighborhood destroyed by the wildfires in California.CreditTom Brenner for The New York Times
Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty to lying to Congress and said Mr. Trump had been more involved in discussions over a potential Russian business deal during the presidential campaign than previously known.

Democrats won control of the House, picking up 40 seats in the midterm elections.

Attorney General Jeff Sessions was forced out of his post. Matthew G. Whitaker stepped in as the acting attorney general. The next month, Mr. Trump nominated William P. Barr for the job.

The 41st president, George Bush, died at age 94. Mr. Trump was invited to the funeral but did not speak.

December
The First Step Act, a criminal justice overhaul, passed with bipartisan support.

Days before the deadline for a new spending bill, Mr. Trump, Vice President Mike Pence, Senator Chuck Schumer and Representative Nancy Pelosi greeted journalists in the Oval Office for a photo opportunity that morphed into an extraordinary on-camera policy debate.

Video

1:07
Pelosi Challenges Trump to Have an ‘Evidence-Based Conversation’
Representative Nancy Pelosi, the House Democratic leader, pushed back against President Trump during an argument in front of reporters over his demand to build a border wall and threat to shut down the government.CreditCreditDoug Mills/The New York Times
Mr. Trump announced that John F. Kelly, the chief of staff, would leave the administration. Mick Mulvaney, his budget director, would fill the post as acting chief of staff. Ryan Zinke, the interior secretary, was also ousted.

Mr. Trump abruptly ordered the removal of American troops from Syria and a drawdown of forces in Afghanistan.

The next day, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis resigned, writing Mr. Trump a letter saying that the president deserved a defense secretary whose views were “better aligned” with his.

Video

2:57
These Are the Generals Who’ve Left the White House
President Trump appointed more generals to senior positions than any other modern president. But with the resignation of Jim Mattis, no will generals remain. Here’s what happened.CreditCreditSarah Silbiger/The New York Times
Mirroring sharp declines in other stock markets, the tech-heavy Nasdaq entered bear territory, down almost 22 percent from its August peak.

The government partly shut down for the third time this year after Mr. Trump made clear that he would not accept a spending bill that did not include $5 billion in funding for a wall along the southern border.

Mikayla Bouchard is an assistant editor based in Washington, where she helps direct and execute multimedia coverage of major news events.