COVER STORY The Challenge The Pressure The Donald
By BILL CARTERJAN. 4, 2004

WHEN the producer Mark Burnett brought Survivor to television four years ago, he frequently made the point that everybody would be able to identify with a format that involved people maneuvering to eliminate rivals and make their way to the top of a competition -- especially people who worked in the cutthroat culture of American business.
Mr. Burnett is setting out to prove that point with The Apprentice, a new NBC reality series that has its premiere on Thursday at 8:30 p.m. before moving to its regular slot on Wednesdays at 8 p.m. The Apprentice is the Survivor format refitted for an office building rather than an island -- with one high-profile wrinkle. In the middle of the action is Donald Trump.
Mr. Trump, the billionaire real estate mogul who has never flinched from any known camera lens, is going prime time. In the show, of which he and Mr. Burnett are executive producers, Mr. Trump will lead a group of 16 contestants through a series of increasingly difficult business tasks, and the prize for the ultimate winner is not a million dollars but a job as president of one of Mr. Trump's business divisions.
And, oh, by the way, nobody gets voted out of this competition. They get fired. By Donald Trump.
Mr. Trump said the demands of the show had proved to be far more than he expected. Mark Burnett is a brilliant producer, but he's an even better salesman, he said. Mr. Burnett had told Mr. Trump that the job would take just a few hours of his time a week. It took much longer, many more hours, Mr. Trump said. But that's what it took to get it right.
Still, he added: I loved the concept from the beginning, and saw precisely the connection to the 'Survivor' format. I told Mark this is going to capture the viciousness of the business world. This is the real jungle. This jungle makes that other jungle look tame.
Continue reading the main story
Not that anybody is going to be eating bugs or rodents on this one. Instead, they must prove their mettle by doing everything from setting up a lemonade stand in mid-Manhattan to learning how to lease a corporate jet.
Mr. Burnett first forged a relationship with Mr. Trump several years ago, when he leased Mr. Trump's Wollman Rink in Manhattan for the live broadcast of the finale of one of his Survivor series. He told Mr. Trump how much he had admired The Art of the Deal, Mr. Trump's book on business, and how it had influenced his leap from selling T-shirts off racks on Venice Boulevard in Los Angeles to producing television shows.
Another aspect of Mr. Burnett's past came into play in hatching the format for The Apprentice. He recalled that during his days in the British military -- he was in an elite British paratroop regiment and fought in the Falkland Islands war -- various challenges were sprung on the group. One time they took away all my money and my ID, Mr. Burnett said. We were out in the west of England. My assignment was to go get the signature of the conductor of that night's concert in Covent Garden. I didn't even know where that was. But he got the signature anyway. Their thought was: if you're really ingenious, you'll find a way to get this assignment done.
So it is with the contestants on The Apprentice. The group of 16 is divided into two teams, each of which is given an assignment described by Mr. Trump. The winning team, the one whose new business makes the most money, is rewarded. The losers face Mr. Trump, who presses them to find the weak link on the team. This allows for some really nasty, vicious moments, as Mr. Trump puts it -- after which he selects one victim, who gets fired. Just like in real life.
In a way it's like one long job interview, Mr. Burnett said. And everybody can identify with that because we've all had job interviews. And of course a lot of us have been fired. He added that some of the people have real meltdowns when they get fired.
The assignments themselves were far more challenging than Mr. Trump imagined they would be. Once, each team was given an apartment in a rundown building, and they had 48 hours to renovate it and rent it out, Mr. Trump said. I didn't think it was possible. But they did it. These kids were just unbelievable. They did things that were really tough.
The show is different from the reality series he had watched because, Mr. Trump said, we only got really smart people.
How smart? Mr. Burnett said the group included a Harvard M.B.A. and an M.B.A. who was also an M.D., as well as some people who were only high school graduates but who had proved themselves as entrepreneurs. One young man had paid for college by starting a boat wash and wax business then moved on to a highly successful international business selling cigars out of his apartment. Several contestants have real estate backgrounds, perhaps an advantage in working with Mr. Trump, but others have none. Many have advanced degrees.
And then there's that basic reality-show requirement. These are really good-looking young people, Mr. Trump said.
Indeed one question about a show like The Apprentice is how it will make up for its obvious shortfall in what is known in the reality business as the bikini factor. Nobody is scantily clad in the office, though they are seen in more casual dress in the loft apartment they share in the Trump Tower.
Mr. Burnett said, The show does have a sexiness to it, but it is the sex appeal that comes with power. Clearly this is a show about power, how to pursue it and achieve it.
And even though the cast's credentials read like those of a group for whom a reality show would seem a bit pedestrian compared with their real-life accomplishments, finding so distinguished a bunch was not difficult. Apparently, even the best and the brightest want to see themselves on television. We had 215,000 applicants, Mr. Burnett said.
In the end, he said, he has high hopes that The Apprentice will capture something elemental in America. It's sort of the American story. American money fuels so much of what happens around the world. This is about becoming a part of that process.
NBC is on board all the way. Jeff Zucker, the president of NBC Entertainment, called it a surprisingly exciting new reality entry. And Donald Trump is amazing in it, he said. He's bigger than life.
Mr. Burnett said NBC executives had told him they felt as much tension watching The Apprentice as they did watching an episode of Law & Order.
The compliment did not entirely surprise him. Whatever you do in television, what matters is characters and storytelling, he said. We've got rich characters here, and the story is really tense and suspenseful.
